docs: provide architeture of CeresDB (#80)
CeresDB/ceresdb: docs/dev/architeture.md

# Introduction to CeresDB's Architecture
## Target
- Provide the overall cognition of CeresDB to the developers who want to know more about CeresDB but have no way to start.
- Make a brief introduction to the important modules of CeresDB and the connections between these modules but details about their implementations are not be involved.

## Motivation

> CeresDB is a timeseries database. However, CeresDB's goal is to handle both timeseries and analytic workloads compared with the traditional ones, which always have a poor performance in handling analytic workloads.

Reviewer: > always have a poor performance

usually have

It's better to avoid using `always` in docs.

└──────────────────────────────────────────┘
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                Query Engine              │
│ ┌─────────────────┐ ┌──────────────────┐ │
│ │     Parser      │ │     Planner      │ │
│ └─────────────────┘ └──────────────────┘ │
│ ┌─────────────────┐ ┌──────────────────┐ │
│ │    Optimizer    │ │     Executor     │ │
│ └─────────────────┘ └──────────────────┘ │
│                                          │
└──────────────────────────────────────────┘
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         Pluggable Table Engine           │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │              Analytic              │  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││      Wal       ││    Memtable    ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││     Flush      ││   Compaction   ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││    Manifest    ││  Object Store  ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  └────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│   ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─      ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─   │

> │        Hybrid    │        Timeseries  │  │

Reviewer 2: describe Hybrid and Timeseries Table Engine？

Now two implementations of `WAL` are provided for stand-alone and distributed mode:
- For stand-alone mode, `WAL` is based on `RocksDB` and data is persisted on the local disk.
- For distributed mode, `WAL` is required as a distributed component and to be responsible for reliability of the newly written data, so now we provide an implementation based on [OceanBase](https://github.com/oceanbase/oceanbase) and in our roadmap a more lightweight implementation will be provided.

Besides, `WAL`'s trait definition tells that `WAL` has the concept of `Region` and actually each table is assigned to a `Region` so that the independence between tables is gained and such an independence provides convenience for some operations on table's level (such as different `TTL`s for different tables).

#### MemTable
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/analytic_engine/src/memtable

`Memtable` is used to store the newly written data and after a certain amount of data is accumulated, CeresDB organizes the data in `MemTable` into a query-friendly storage format (`SST`) and stores it to the persistent device. Before persisting, `MemTable` also provides querying.

> The current implementation of `MemTable` is based on [agatedb's skiplist](https://github.com/tikv/agatedb/blob/8510bff2bfde5b766c3f83cf81c00141967d48a4/skiplist). It allows concurrent reads and writes and equipped with [Arena](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/components/skiplist) has the capability of controlling memory usage.

Author: `MemTable` uses `Arena` to control memory usage and I guess it is an important part.

> The current implementation of `MemTable` is based on [agatedb's skiplist](https://github.com/tikv/agatedb/blob/8510bff2bfde5b766c3f83cf81c00141967d48a4/skiplist). It allows concurrent reads and writes and equipped with [Arena](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/components/skiplist) has the capability of controlling memory usage.

Reviewer: OK, maybe we can rephrase like
> and it has the capability of memory control based on Arena

Any thoughts?

> The current implementation of `MemTable` is based on [agatedb's skiplist](https://github.com/tikv/agatedb/blob/8510bff2bfde5b766c3f83cf81c00141967d48a4/skiplist). It allows concurrent reads and writes and equipped with [Arena](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/components/skiplist) has the capability of controlling memory usage.

Author: OK.

> The current implementation of `MemTable` is based on [agatedb's skiplist](https://github.com/tikv/agatedb/blob/8510bff2bfde5b766c3f83cf81c00141967d48a4/skiplist). It allows concurrent reads and writes and equipped with [Arena](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/components/skiplist) has the capability of controlling memory usage.

Author: It will be written as: "it has the capability of memory usage control based on Arena"

The `SST` generated by `Flush` needs to be persisted and the abstraction of the persistent storage device is `ObjectStore` including multiple implementations:
- Based on local file system;
- Based on [Alibaba Cloud OSS](https://www.alibabacloud.com/product/object-storage-service).

The distributed architecture of CeresDB separates storage and computing, which requires `Object Store` needs to be a highly available and reliable service independent of CeresDB. Therefore, storage systems like [Alibaba Cloud OSS](https://www.alibabacloud.com/product/object-storage-service) is a good choice and in the future implementations on storage systems of some other cloud service providers is planned to provide.

#### SST
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/analytic_engine/src/sst

Both `Flush` and `Compaction` involves `SST` and in the codebase `SST` itself is actually an abstraction that can have multiple specific implementations. The current implementation is based on [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/), which is a column-oriented data file format designed for efficient data storage and retrieval.

> The format of `SST` is very critical for retrieving data and is also the most important part to perform well in handling both timeseries and analytic workloads. At present, our [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/)-based implementation is good at processing analytic workload but is poor at processing timeseries workload. In our road map, a new hybrid storage format is planned to be able to process the two workloads at the same time.

Reviewer: > In our road map, a new hybrid storage format is planned to be able to process the two workloads at the same time.

In our roadmap, we will explore more storage formats in order to achieve good performance in both workloads.

#### Space
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/blob/main/analytic_engine/src/space.rs

In `Analytic Engine`, there is a concept called `space` and here is an explanation for it to resolve some ambiguities when read source code. Actually `Analytic Engine` does not have the concept of `catalog` and `schema` and only provides two levels of relationship: `space` and `table`. And in the implementation, the `schema id` (which should be unique across all `catalog`s) on the upper layer is actually mapped to `space id`.

The `space` in `Analytic Engine` serves mainly for isolation of resources for different tenants, such as the usage of memory.

## Critical Path
After a brief introduction to some important modules of CeresDB, we will give a description for some critical paths in code, hoping to provide interested developers with a guide for reading the code.

> ### Query

Reviewer: It would be better if we provide a flowchart to explain the query/write process.

- https://plantuml.com/ascii-art

Take `SELECT` SQL as an example:
- Server module chooses a proper module to process the requests according the protocol (it may be HTTP, gRPC or mysql) used by the requests;
- Parse SQL in the request by the parser;
- With the parsed sql and the catalog/schema module, [DataFusion](https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion) can generate the logical plan;
- With the logical plan, the corresponding `Interpreter` (`Interpreter` module  encapsulates the SQL `CRUD` operations) is created and logical plan will be executed by it;
- For the logical plan of normal `Select` SQL, it will be executed through `SelectInterpreter`;
- In the `SelectInterpreter` the specific query logic is executed by the `Query Engine`:
    - Optimize the logical plan;
    - Generate the physical plan;
    - Optimize the physical plan;
    - Execute the physical plan;
- The execution of physical plan involves `Analytic Engine`:
    - Data is obtained by `read` method of `Table` instance provided by `Analytic Engine`;

>     - The source of the table data is `SST` and `Memtable`, and the data supports being filtered by the pushed down predicates;

Reviewer: >  and the data supports being filtered by the pushed down predicates;

and those components may support predicates to filter unnecessary data.

Author: > support predicates to filter ...

It sounds not very good.

Author: How about "the data can be filtered by the pushed down predicates."

Reviewer: Sounds good.

    - After retrieving the table data, `Query Engine` will complete the specific computation and generate the final results;

> - `SelectInterpreter` gets the results and returns them to the protocol module;

Reviewer: and feed them to...

│         Pluggable Table Engine           │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │              Analytic              │  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││      Wal       ││    Memtable    ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││     Flush      ││   Compaction   ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  │┌────────────────┐┌────────────────┐│  │
│  ││    Manifest    ││  Object Store  ││  │
│  │└────────────────┘└────────────────┘│  │
│  └────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│   ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─      ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─   │
│        Hybrid    │        Timeseries  │  │
│   └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─      └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─   │
└──────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

The figure above shows the architecture of CeresDB stand-alone service. And it should be noted some modules(`Hybrid` and `Timeseries` Table Engine) wrapped by dashed line means they are just in plan and have not been implemented yet.

The details of some important modules will be described in the following part.

### RPC Layer
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/server

> The current RPC supports multiple protocols including HTTP, GRPC, MySQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current RPC supports multiple protocols including HTTP, gRPC, MySQL.
```

### Pluggable Table Engine
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/table_engine

`Table Engine` is actually a storage engine for managing tables in CeresDB and the pluggability of `Table Engine` is a core design of CeresDB which matters in achieving our target (process both timeseries and analytic workloads well). CeresDB will have multiple kinds of `Table Engine` for different workloads and the most appropriate one should be chosen as the storage engine according to the workload pattern.

Now the requirements for a `Table Engine` are:
- Manage all the shared resources under the engine:
    - Memory
    - Storage
    - CPU
- Manage metadata of tables such as table schema and table options;
- Provide `Table` instances which provides `read` and `write` methods;
- Take responsibilities for creating, opening, dropping and closing `Table` instance;
- ....

> Actually the things that a `Table Engine` needs to process are a little complicated. And now in CeresDB only one `Table Engine` called `Analytic` is provided and does a good job in processing analytical workload, but it is not ready yet to handle the timeseries workload (we plan to enhance it for a better performance by increasing some indexes which helps handle timeseries workload).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Actually the things that a `Table Engine` needs to process are a little complicated. And now in CeresDB only one `Table Engine` called `Analytic` is provided and does a good job in processing analytical workload, but it is not ready yet to handle the timeseries workload (we plan to enhance it for a better performance by adding some indexes which help handle timeseries workload).
```

#### WAL
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/wal

The model of CeresDB processing data is `WAL` + `MemTable` that the recent written data is written to `WAL` first and then to `MemTable` and after a certain amount of data in `MemTable` is accumulated, the data will be organized in a query-friendly form to persistent devices.

Now two implementations of `WAL` are provided for stand-alone and distributed mode:
- For stand-alone mode, `WAL` is based on `RocksDB` and data is persisted on the local disk.
- For distributed mode, `WAL` is required as a distributed component and to be responsible for reliability of the newly written data, so now we provide an implementation based on [OceanBase](https://github.com/oceanbase/oceanbase) and in our roadmap a more lightweight implementation will be provided.

Besides, `WAL`'s trait definition tells that `WAL` has the concept of `Region` and actually each table is assigned to a `Region` so that the isolation between tables is gained and such an isolation provides convenience for some operations on table's level (such as different `TTL`s for different tables).

> #### MemTable

Reviewer 3: Do we need to mention sampling memtable here?

Author: Maybe these details should be explained in some specific docs.

module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/analytic_engine/src/memtable

> `Memtable` is used to store the newly written data and after a certain amount of data is accumulated, CeresDB organizes the data in `MemTable` into a query-friendly storage format (`SST`) and stores it to the persistent device. Before persisting, `MemTable` also provides querying.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Memtable` is used to store the newly written data and after a certain amount of data is accumulated, CeresDB organizes the data in `MemTable` into a query-friendly storage format (`SST`) and stores it in the persistent device. `MemTable` is readable before it got persisted (flushed).
```

Author: - Maybe `stores it to` is better?
- Mabye `before it gets persisted` is better?

During the flushing procedure, the data will be divided by a certain time range (which is configured by table option `Segment Duration`), and no `SST` will span the `Segment Duration`. Actually this is also a common operation in most timeseries databases which organizes data in the time dimension to speed up subsequent time-related operations, such as querying data over a time range and assisting purge data outside the `TTL`.

At present, the control process of `Flush` is a little complicated, so the details will be explained in another document.

#### Compaction
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/analytic_engine/src/compaction

The data of `MemTable` is flushed as `SST`s, but the file size of recently flushed `SST` may be very small. And too small or too many `SST`s lead to the poor query performance. Therefore, `Compaction` is then introduced to rearrange the `SST`s so that the multiple smaller `SST` files can be compacted into a larger `SST` file.

The detailed strategy of `Compaction` will also be described with `Flush` in subsequent documents.

#### Manifest
module path: https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/tree/main/analytic_engine/src/meta

> `Manifest` takes responsibilities for managing metadata of `Analytic Engine` including:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Manifest` takes responsibilities for managing table's metadata in `Analytic Engine` including:
```

Author: I would put it as `tables'`.
